Tutorial collection
===================

On launching the Pytch IDE, the user has a choice of tutorials.  To
know what tutorials are available, the IDE loads the file
``tutorials-index.html`` and uses it to populate the *List of
tutorials* pane.

The ``pytchbuild-gather-tutorials`` utility builds this
``tutorials-index.html`` file and includes it in the resulting
zipfile.  To know what tutorials belong in the collection, it reads
the file ``index.yaml`` in the root of the ``pytch-tutorials`` repo's
working directory.  See below for the workflow for changing this file.
The utility can also, if requested, create a new *release* of the
tutorial collection.


Creating a zipfile of all tutorials
-----------------------------------

Running the command::

    pytchbuild-gather-tutorials -o /tmp/tutorials.zip

will read the current working copy of the ``index.yaml`` file, and use
it to create the zipfile given by the ``-o`` argument.


Structure of tutorial list HTML
-------------------------------

The ``tutorial-index.html`` file has the following structure::

    <div class="tutorial-index">
      <div class="tutorial-summary" data-tutorial-name="bunner">
        <p class="image-container">
          <img alt="Screenshot" src="summary-screenshot.png"/></p>
        <h1>Bunner — a Frogger-like game</h1>
        <p>In this tutorial we'll ...</p>
      </div>
      <div class="tutorial-summary" data-tutorial-name="boing">
        <p class="image-container">
          <img alt="Screenshot" src="summary-screenshot.png"/></p>
        <h1>Boing — a Pong-like game</h1>
        <p>This tutorial shows you ...</p>
      </div>
      <!-- DIVs for other tutorials -->
    </div>


Archive of releases
-------------------

Each tutorial is developed in its own branch, allowing history to be
re-written while the tutorial is being developed.

We would like to ensure reproducibility for the tutorials, in that we
would like to be able to:

- go back to a particular history of some individual tutorial;

- remember what tutorials, and with what histories, were in the
  collection at different times.

Both needs are met by having a ``releases`` branch, *which authors do
not directly commit to*.  Instead, the workflow for releasing a new
version of the tutorial collection is as follows.


Releasing a new version of the tutorial collection
--------------------------------------------------

The maintainer checks out the branch ``release-recipes``, which
contains just the ``index.yaml`` file.  The maintainer might be
releasing a new version of the tutorial collection because:

- one of the individual tutorials has been revised — perhaps its
  author has edited the wording of the tutorial text, or re-arranged
  the history of the commits developing the ``code.py`` file;

- the collection itself has been revised — perhaps we have added a new
  tutorial, or removed an old one, or changed the order of the
  tutorials in the collection.

In the first case, the ``index.yaml`` file does not need to change.
(Unless the author renamed the branch containing the tutorial in
question.)

In the second case, it does, and so the maintainer edits
``index.yaml`` and commits that change to the ``release-recipes``
branch.

Either way, the maintainer runs, from somewhere in the tutorials
repo::

    pytchbuild-gather-tutorials --make-release -o /tmp/tutorials.zip

This will produce the tutorials bundle zipfile as usual, but then also
make a commit to the ``releases`` branch.  The commit to ``releases``
has a hard-coded generic commit message.  Ideally, the maintainer will
check out the ``releases`` branch and reword its tip commit's message
to something more meaningful.  This can be done with::

    git commit --amend --only

on the command line, or ``cw`` (Commit reWord) if using `Magit
<https://magit.vc/>`_.  Rewording the commit's message must be done
*before* pushing upstream, to avoiding rewriting upstream history.

If the working copy of the ``index.yaml`` file differs from the
version stored at the tip of ``release-recipes``, an error will be
thrown.  This is to guard against creating an inconsistent release.


Creating a bundle from a ``releases`` commit
--------------------------------------------

For full reproducibility of the tutorials bundle, the
``pytchbuild-gather-tutorials`` tool can also build a zipfile from the
information stored in a particular ``releases`` commit.  Supposing the
commit of interest on ``releases`` is tagged ``v2.3.1``, a bundle
matching that point can be made with:

.. code-block:: bash

  pytchbuild-gather-tutorials --from-release v2.3.1 -o /tmp/tuts-2.3.1.zip


Details: Commits on ``releases``
--------------------------------

A commit to the ``release`` branch has many parents.  Its first parent
is the previous state of the ``release`` branch, as usual.  Its other
parents are, first, the then-current tip of the ``release-recipes``
branch, followed by the then-current tips of the tutorials' branches,
i.e., as they were when they were used to build the tutorial
collection.  In this way, tutorials' individual historical commit
histories are preserved.

To ease the reconstruction of the historical state of the tutorial
bundle, the ``--make-release`` option also writes a file
``build-sources.yaml`` into the root of the repository tree for the
new commit to ``releases``.  This file contains information on each
contribution to the tutorial bundle: its user-visible name, the name
of the branch as it was when creating the bundle, the directory name
containing the tutorial's files, and the commit oid of the tip of that
branch.  To some extent this duplicates the information in the list of
parents of the commit, but in a more convenient form.
